tutorials/git.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: Version Control
parent: Tutorials
nav_order: 1
---

# Version Control

This tutorial describes the basic usage of git, a version control system to track code changes among yourself and any collaborators.
If you run into any difficulties following any of these steps, please post in our class channel (#phys709-fall2024) on Slack.

## Create your own repository

We created our account in prior steps so now we're ready to actually utilize version control.
Git is a version control system that lets you share versions of code remotely with other collaborators (or have a remote version you can save and access from any computer).
GitHub is a cloud-based platform that uses Git for storing, managing, and sharing code.

Once logged in you can create a new repository (or git-enabled folder) by clicking the bright green "New" button (you may need to navigate to "Repositories" first).
Go ahead and create a new repo called `test-repo`; you can choose Public or Private depending on who you want to grant viewership.
Click to add a README, then click "Create repository".

You'll now be on the landing page for your newly created repository.
By granting me access (settings/access and "Add people"-> "gavinsdavies") you will have completed this first basic tutorial.

Commit message:

reminder to complete github sign up first

tutorials/git.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: Version Control
parent: Tutorials
nav_order: 1
---

# Version Control

This tutorial describes the basic usage of git, a version control system to track code changes among yourself and any collaborators.
If you run into any difficulties following any of these steps, please post in our class channel (#phys709-fall2024) on Slack.
Make sure to complete the GitHub sign up instructions detailed on the [Technology]({{ site.baseurl }}{% link technology.md %}#github) page.

## Create your own repository

We created our account in prior steps so now we're ready to actually utilize version control.
Git is a version control system that lets you share versions of code remotely with other collaborators (or have a remote version you can save and access from any computer).
GitHub is a cloud-based platform that uses Git for storing, managing, and sharing code.

Once logged in you can create a new repository (or git-enabled folder) by clicking the bright green "New" button (you may need to navigate to "Repositories" first).
Go ahead and create a new repo called `test-repo`; you can choose Public or Private depending on who you want to grant viewership.
Click to add a README, then click "Create repository".

You'll now be on the landing page for your newly created repository.
By granting me access (settings/access and "Add people"-> "gavinsdavies") you will have completed this first basic tutorial.
